Guidance on testing EF Core apps (#2216)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/miscellaneous/testing/index.md

---
title: Test components using EF Core - EF Core
description: Different approaches to testing applications that use EF Core
author: ajcvickers
ms.date: 03/23/2020
uid: core/miscellaneous/testing/index
---
# Testing code that uses EF Core

Testing code that accesses a database requires either:
* Running queries and updates against the same database system used in production.
* Running queries and updates against some other easier to manage database system.
* Using test doubles or some other mechanism to avoid using a database at all.

This document outlines the trade offs involved in each of these choices and shows how EF Core can be used with each approach.  

## All database providers are not equal

It is very important to understand that EF Core is not designed to abstract every aspect of the underlying database system.
Instead, EF Core is a common set of patterns and concepts that can be used with any database system.
EF Core database providers then layer database-specific behavior and functionality over this common framework.
This allows each database system to do what it does best while still maintaining commonality, where appropriate, with other database systems. 

> Fundamentally, this means that it is inadvisable to switch out the database provider and expect the application to function in exactly the same way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fundamentally, this means that switching out the database provider will change EF Core behavior and the application can't be expected to function correctly unless it explicitly accounts for all differences in behavior.
```

This illustrates that using the real database system can be a performant solution.
It is a myth that using some lighter-weight database is the only way to run tests quickly.

That being said, what if for whatever reason you can't run tests against something close to your production database system?
The next best choice is to use something with similar functionality.
This usually means another relational database, for which [SQLite](https://sqlite.org/index.html) is the obvious choice.

SQLite is a good choice because:
* It runs in-process with your application and so has low overhead.
* It uses simple, automatically created files for databases, and so doesn't require database management.
* It has an in-memory mode that avoids even the file creation.

However, remember that:
* SQLite inevitability doesn't support everything that your production database system does.
* SQLite will behave differently than your production database system for some queries.

So if you do use SQLite for some testing, make sure to also test against your real database system.

See [Testing with SQLite](xref:core/miscellaneous/testing/sqlite) for EF Core specific guidance. 

> 

Reviewer: Most developers use in-memory instead of relational for perf reasons, so we should gives some tips how to speed it up. Assuming most of the time is spent creating the database/schema:

- Write tests that don't change the database or are wrapped in a transaction that is rolled back after the test is finished.
- Clean the database data instead of recreating the schema. See [SqlServerDatabaseCleaner.cs](https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/blob/72639663d1e618c91385e1e57ce06530fa330450/test/EFCore.SqlServer.FunctionalTests/TestUtilities/SqlServerDatabaseCleaner.cs) for a generic way of how to do this.
- Create multiple copies of the database and assign one per test class to be able to run the tests in parallel

Author: Agreed. I have been sample tests and had similar thoughts. I think I'll create a new document for this to go alongside the updated docs for SQLite and in-memory.

Author: Will do this in another PR.

## Approach 3: The EF Core in-memory database

EF Core comes with an in-memory database that we use for internal testing of EF Core itself.
This database is in general **not suitable as a substitute for testing applications that use EF Core**. Specifically:
* It is not a relational database
* It doesn't support transactions
* It is not optimized for performance

None of this is very important when testing EF Core internals because we use it specifically where the database is irrelevant to the test.
On the other hand, these things tend to be very important when testing an application that uses EF Core.

## Unit testing

Consider testing a piece of business logic that might need to use some data from a database, but is not inherently testing the database interactions.
One option is to use a [test double](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_double) such as a mock or fake.

We use test doubles for internal testing of EF Core.
However, we never try to mock DbContext or IQueryable.
Doing so is difficult, cumbersome, and fragile.

> Don't do it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Don't do it.**
```
😄

Instead we use the in-memory database when unit testing something that uses DbContext.
In this case using the in-memory database is appropriate because the test is not dependent on database behavior.

> Just don't do this to test actual database queries or updates.   

Reviewer: Ambiguous what "this" is referring to. In general this sentence is low value

Author: Will re-word or remove in next PR.

Fundamentally, this means that it is inadvisable to switch out the database provider and expect the application to function in exactly the same way.
That being said, in many cases doing this will work because there is a high degree of commonality amongst relational databases.
This is good and bad.
Good because moving between databases can be relatively easy.
Bad because it can give a false sense of security if the application is not fully tested against the new database system.  

## Approach 1: Real database

As described in the previous section, the only way to be sure you are testing what runs in production is to use the same database system.
For example, if the deployed application uses SQL Azure, then for the highest fidelity, testing should also be done against SQL Azure.

However, having every developer run tests against SQL Azure while actively working on the code would be both slow and expensive.
This illustrates the main trade off involved throughout these approaches: when is it appropriate to deviate from the production database system so as to improve test efficiency?

> Luckily, in this case the answer is quite easy: use local or on-premise SQL Server for developer testing.

Reviewer 2: on-premises
